### I Detect a Clue

Despite your elevator problems, your hamster guests appear perfectly content,
and your hotel grows to large acclaim in the hamster world.  Still, you can't
help but be embarrassed every day when you explain that your elevator is still
not adequately controllable.

You gain enough revenue that you decide to try things again with a human
factor.

Your scheme is simple: have a little bell attached at the point where every
elevator reaches the perfect height.  Your elevator boy will turn the knob up,
up, up until he hears the bell, and then stop it right after.  And then turn
it down slightly to account for his predictable overshoot.

The same thing works for going down -- tell him to turn the knob down, down
until he hears a bell.  Then to turn it slightly up to account for his
overshoot.  Conveniently, he always overshoots by the exact same amount every
time.

And suddenly, things seem to click.

This system accounts for all of the problems we ran into before.  We have a
human here who can account for everything.  He makes all of the adjustments on
the fly.  He doesn't need to know any exact percentages ... he doesn't need to
worry about water pressure or friction or hamster weights, or any of that
stuff.  All he needs to know is "should I be increasing the flow, decreasing
it, or leaving it alone?"  So maybe the heavier hamsters get to their
destinations slower --- so what?  You've discovered something amazing.

The key here is the *detection*.  The key here is that you are no longer
thinking of a static system that will never change --- you are constantly
adjusting on the fly.  You are doing things, detecting the reactions, and
responding to those detections.

Still, this system isn't perfect ... sometimes, if you forget to





