Advent of Code 2017! Ongoing solutions and explanations
=======================================================

> Originally posted by [Justin Le](https://blog.jle.im/) on December 7, 2017.
> [Read online!](https://blog.jle.im/entry/advent-of-code-2017.html)

Just a short post to share that I started a github repository of my [Advent of
Code 2017 Solutions](https://github.com/mstksg/advent-of-code-2017), as I write
them!

I also am including my
[reflections](https://github.com/mstksg/advent-of-code-2017/blob/master/reflections.md)
and explanations on my solutions, explaining my thought processes and how the
solutions work.

Yes I definitely spent a bit too much time writing the executable, which is an
automated (cached) downloader, test suite runner (on sample inputs), and
benchmark suite.

I originally was only going to casually try the problems (like I did last year),
but I hit a decent global rank by accident on Day 4 (which was very suited for
Haskell!), and since then I've been taking things seriously to try to aim for
the global leaderboard (top 100). This is a struggle for me because I'm not
really the *fastest* algorithm person, but I think it's a fun goal for me to try
to hit this year.

Wish me luck! And if you haven't started yet, it's not too late to join in the
fun! [glguy](https://twitter.com/glguy) has been maintaining the semi-official
[Haskell Leaderboard](adventofcode.com/2017/leaderboard/private) (join code
`43100-84040706`) -- come join us!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hi, thanks for reading! You can reach me via email at <justin@jle.im>, or at
twitter at [\@mstk](https://twitter.com/mstk)! This post and all others are
published under the [CC-BY-NC-ND
3.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) license. Corrections
and edits via pull request are welcome and encouraged at [the source
repository](https://github.com/mstksg/inCode).

If you feel inclined, or this post was particularly helpful for you, why not
consider [supporting me on Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/justinle/overview),
or a [BTC donation](bitcoin:3D7rmAYgbDnp4gp4rf22THsGt74fNucPDU)? :)

