Advent of Code 2019: Back again with more daily reflections!
============================================================

> Originally posted by [Justin Le](https://blog.jle.im/).
> [Read online!](https://blog.jle.im/entry/advent-of-code-2019.html)

Keeping up with the [advent of
code](https://blog.jle.im/entries/tagged/advent-of-code.html) tradition on this
blog, I'm just letting anyone interested know that I am participating again this
year! I still have my [daily
reflections](https://github.com/mstksg/advent-of-code-2019/blob/master/reflections.md)
as well, if you are interested in following along with what I hope are clean
Haskell solutions for each part. I'll also be posting short blog posts when I
can if I find anything especially interesting :)

This year I also have an [rss
feed](http://feeds.feedburner.com/jle-advent-of-code-2019) for my reflections as
well, if you want to follow it like a blog.

If you are playing along as well, it's not late to join the semi-official
[Haskell
Leaderboard](https://adventofcode.com/2019/leaderboard/private/view/43100) (join
code `43100-84040706`) --- we'd love to have you along! We also have a lot of
fun discussions in [freenode](https://webchat.freenode.net/) channel
`##adventofcode`, and also in the [FP
slack](https://functionalprogramming.slack.com/archives/CEJ8HASQN).

And if you're using Haskell, you might be able to make your life easier by using
my [Advent of Code API
Bindings](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/advent-of-code-api), for fetching
inputs and prompts and making submissions.

Best wishes to all of you this advent season!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hi, thanks for reading! You can reach me via email at <justin@jle.im>, or at
twitter at [\@mstk](https://twitter.com/mstk)! This post and all others are
published under the [CC-BY-NC-ND
3.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) license. Corrections
and edits via pull request are welcome and encouraged at [the source
repository](https://github.com/mstksg/inCode).

If you feel inclined, or this post was particularly helpful for you, why not
consider [supporting me on Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/justinle/overview),
or a [BTC donation](bitcoin:3D7rmAYgbDnp4gp4rf22THsGt74fNucPDU)? :)

