Alchemical Groups: Advent of Code with Free Groups and Group Homomorphisms

===========================================================================

> Originally posted by [Justin Le](https://blog.jle.im/) on December 5, 2018.
> [Read online!](https://blog.jle.im/entry/alchemical-groups.html)

Hi all! If you don't already know, *[Advent of
Code](https://adventofcode.com/2018)* is in full swing this year! If you're
participating and using Haskell, you're welcome to join us at
[glguy](https://twitter.com/glguy)'s semi-official [Haskell
Leaderboard](https://adventofcode.com/2018/leaderboard/private) (join code
`43100-84040706`)! There are also Haskellers on freenode ##adventofcode, and
also #adventofcode on the Functional Programming slack. I also wrote a [haskell
library to the API](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/advent-of-code-api), if
you're looking to streamline your process!

My [daily
reflections](https://github.com/mstksg/advent-of-code-2018/blob/master/reflections.md)
are online, where I talk about how I approach each problem and what insight
purely typed Functional Programming gives us for each problem.

Every once in a while I'll find a challenge that I think can be pulled out as a
short blog post, so I'll bring them onto the blog for a more long-term sort of
longevity![^1]

In this one, I'll talk about using group theory to solve the *Day 5* challenge.
Spoilers for those who have not solved it yet!

## Part 1

> You've managed to sneak in to the prototype suit manufacturing lab. The Elves
> are making decent progress, but are still struggling with the suit's size
> reduction capabilities.
>
> While the very latest in 1518 alchemical technology might have solved their
> problem eventually, you can do better. You scan the chemical composition of
> the suit's material and discover that it is formed by extremely long
> [polymers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polymer) (one of which is
> [available]{title="I've always wanted a polymer!"} as your puzzle input).
>
> The polymer is formed by smaller *units* which, when triggered, react with
> each other such that two adjacent units of the same type and opposite polarity
> are destroyed. Units' types are represented by letters; units' polarity is
> represented by capitalization. For instance, `r` and `R` are units with the
> same type but opposite polarity, whereas `r` and `s` are entirely different
> types and do not react.
>
> For example:
>
> -   In `aA`, `a` and `A` react, leaving nothing behind.
> -   In `abBA`, `bB` destroys itself, leaving `aA`. As above, this then
>     destroys itself, leaving nothing.
> -   In `abAB`, no two adjacent units are of the same type, and so nothing
>     happens.
> -   In `aabAAB`, even though `aa` and `AA` are of the same type, their
>     polarities match, and so nothing happens.
>
> Now, consider a larger example, `dabAcCaCBAcCcaDA`:
>
>     dabAcCaCBAcCcaDA  The first 'cC' is removed.
>     dabAaCBAcCcaDA    This creates 'Aa', which is removed.
>     dabCBAcCcaDA      Either 'cC' or 'Cc' are removed (the result is the same).
>     dabCBAcaDA        No further actions can be taken.
>
> After all possible reactions, the resulting polymer contains *10 units*.
>
> *How many units remain after fully reacting the polymer you scanned?*

Now, I feel like this problem might have been deliberately written to obscure
this fact, but what it is describing is *exactly* the behavior of a [Free
Group](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free_group), from group theory![^2]

A fully reacted polymer is an element of the free group generated by the set of
26 letters of the alphabet, $F(26)$. Basically, we can talk about interpeting
the string `dabAcCaCBAcCcaDA` as
`d <> a <> b <> A <> c <> C <> a <> C <> B <> etc.`, where `<>` is the group
action ("mappend", in Haskell-speak) and `A` stands for "`a` inverse".

We can use
*[Data.Group.Free](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/free-algebras/docs/Data-Group-Free.html)*
from the *[free-algebras](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/free-algebras)*
library[^3], which offers a free group type `FreeGroupL`, to let us write:

``` haskell
import qualified Data.Group.Free as FG

interpret :: [Char] -> FG.FreeGroupL Char
interpret = foldMap inject          -- that's `foldMap` from Data.Foldable
```

where `inject :: Char -> FreeGroupL Char` takes a `Char` and turns it into the
element of our free group. We can do this by using the library's `returnFree`
and `invert` (from the `Group` typeclass):

``` haskell
import           Data.Algebra.Free
import           Data.Char
import           Data.Group

inject :: Char -> FG.FreeGroupL Char
inject c
    | isAlpha c && isLower c = returnFree c
    | isAlpha c && isUpper c = invert (returnFree (toLower c))
    | otherwise              = mempty       -- group identity element
```

`returnFree` returns a "singleton" in the free group.

The question is essentially asking for the length of the Tietze list
representation of the final result. We can get this using `FG.toList`, and so
our entire part 1 is just:

``` haskell
day05a :: [Char] -> Int
day05a = length . FG.toList . foldMap inject
```

Was this problem actually deliberately written to obscure the fact that we have
a group action? We can't say for sure, but it definitely seems to paint an
"imperative", step-by-step picture. Most implementations might scan the list for
things to replace, and iterate over things until there is no more change. The
problem is also written to maybe imply the fact that ordering of reduction of
different items across the string *might* matter (is it left to right, or right
to left?).

However, we know that ordering of reduction *can't* matter, because we have a
*group action* `<>`, which we know from group theory is, by definition,
associative. Knowing that we have a group, we can immediately throw away any
thought of caring about things like sequential, imperative order, and the
complications that might come from it.

I think that these useful properties about the reduction process are *not*
obvious from an initial reading. Being able to recognize that we have a group is
the key to unlocking all of these insights, *for free*!

## Part 2

> Time to improve the polymer.
>
> One of the unit types is causing problems; it's preventing the polymer from
> collapsing as much as it should. Your goal is to figure out which unit type is
> causing the most problems, remove all instances of it (regardless of
> polarity), fully react the remaining polymer, and measure its length.
>
> For example, again using the polymer `dabAcCaCBAcCcaDA` from above:
>
> -   Removing all `A`/`a` units produces `dbcCCBcCcD`. Fully reacting this
>     polymer produces `dbCBcD`, which has length 6.
> -   Removing all `B`/`b` units produces `daAcCaCAcCcaDA`. Fully reacting this
>     polymer produces `daCAcaDA`, which has length 8.
> -   Removing all `C`/`c` units produces `dabAaBAaDA`. Fully reacting this
>     polymer produces `daDA`, which has length 4.
> -   Removing all `D`/`d` units produces `abAcCaCBAcCcaA`. Fully reacting this
>     polymer produces `abCBAc`, which has length 6.
>
> In this example, removing all `C`/`c` units was best, producing the answer
> *4*.
>
> *What is the length of the shortest polymer you can produce* by removing all
> units of exactly one type and fully reacting the result?

Even though the problem again seems to be written to obscure this fact, we can
see that Part 2 is describing a *group homomorphism*. That is, it talks about
functions that map $F(26)$ (the free group on the 26 letters of the alphabet) to
$F(25)$ (the free group on the letters of the alphabet excluding some cleaned
letter).

Luckily, the free group $F(S)$ comes equipped with a handy function create group
homomorphisms "for free":

``` haskell
foldMapFree
    :: Group b
    => (a -> b)
    -> (FreeGroupL a -> b)     -- the group homomorphism
```

That is, given any `a -> b` for a group `b`, we get a *guaranteed* group
homormohpsim from `FreeGroupL a` to `b`. We can write a function from the
*generators* of our group (in this case, `Char`), and it'll give us a group
homomorphism on the *free group* on our generators.

We can use this to write our $F(26) \rightarrow F(25)$ group homomorphism

``` haskell
foldMapFree
    :: (Char -> FreeGroupL Char)  -- map letters to letters-minus-some-letter
    -> FreeGroupL Char
    -> FreeGroupL Char
```

(Note that this type signature looks a lot like `=<<`, for monads. Coincidence?)

We can now create a "cleaned" version of our reaction by using:

``` haskell
clean
    :: Char                                     -- ^ given a letter to clean
    -> (FreeGroupL Char -> FreeGroupL Char)     -- ^ return a group homomorphism
clean c = foldMapFree $ \d ->
        if d == c
          then mempty
          else returnFree d
```

And so that's part 2! We just need `clean` and this next function:

``` haskell
day05b :: String -> Int
day05b rawInput = minimum
    [ length (FG.toList (clean c polymer))
    | c <- ['a' .. 'z']
    ]
  where
    polymer :: FreeGroupL Char
    polymer = foldMap inject rawInput
```

Basically, we find the minimum of all of the possible "cleaned" lengths.

The best part about this, I think, is that we actually introduced a *large
optimization*, completely *by accident*, thanks to group theory.

Because we recognize that this is a group homomorphism, we know the properties
of group homomorphisms apply. Namely, the most important one: "Aggregating, then
cleaning" is the *same* as "cleaning, then aggregating".

That's because all group homomorphisms necessarily obey the law:

``` haskell
f x <> f y == f (x <> y)
```

This means that we are free to either "clean first, then aggregate", or
"aggregate first, then clean".

## What's in a Group?

Now, I don't know about you, but I definitely feel that this choice (clean,
aggregate vs. aggregate, clean) we have is *definitely not obvious* just from
reading the problem immediately. Indeed, it seems like the problem might be
written to obscure this choice from us: it's implying that "cleaning, then
reacting" is the only correct way, and "reacting, then cleaning" is not
something that is even mentioned.

But, thanks to group theory, we know that these are equivalent, so we can
substitute which ever version is more efficient!

This is, I believe, at the heart of what people say is the advantage of "using
monoids", "using monads", "using functors", etc. in Haskell. That's because if
we state our programs in terms of monoids, monads, groups, functors, etc., then
we get *the entire body of group theory* (or monad theory, or functor theory,
etc.) to help us make program reductions that aren't immediately obviously legal
but that have already been proven to be equivalent by mathematicians. We hijack
their work!

We get program optimizations and reductions and substitutions for free, by
"stealing" from the large body of such things that mathematicians have spent
centuries collecting.

### Epilogue: A Note on Cleaning

Since I have posted this, I have gotten a few comments on different platforms
debating whether or not "clean then aggregate" is truly same as "aggregate then
clean".

Just to clarify, `clean c` here does *not* mean "remove `c`". It means
"re-interpret our group element with the new property that `c` is the identity
element". Clean is like a "re-reaction". To draw the chemical analogy, it can be
thought of as a redox reaction that doesn't "remove" atoms, but rather "rewrites
the rules of the polymer". The identity is that "aggregate the polymer, and then
rewrite its roles" is the same as "rewrite the rules, then aggregate the
polymer".

Clean is not a "removal". It's "re-interpretation".

To be more clear, if we have a function `cleanB` which cleans out the letter
`b`, we can take `abAcdD` as an example and *aggregate* it to get:

``` haskell
a <> b <> A <> c <> D
```

Now, we can clean that aggregation to get:

``` haskell
cleanB (a <> b <> A <> c <> D)
```

That's our "aggregate, then clean". Our "clean, then aggregate" would be:

``` haskell
cleanB a <> cleanB b <> cleanB A <> cleanB c <> cleanB D
```

The library *free-algebras* gives us `foldMapFree`, which creates group
homomorphisms *by construction*. That means that whatever function we get out of
`foldMapFree`, it is *mathematically proven* that:

``` haskell
cleanB (a <> b <> A <> c <> D)
 == cleanB a <> cleanB b <> cleanB A <> cleanB c <> cleanB D
```

Or, that "aggregate then clean" is the same as "clean then aggregate".

This is because the implementation of `foldMapFree` (and therefore `cleanB`) is
not to simply "remove" `b`, but rather to move us into a *new* group where `b`
is the identity. This completely re-interprets the structure of the polymer, and
the implementation is careful to do this properly so that it *does* commute.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hi, thanks for reading! You can reach me via email at <justin@jle.im>, or at
twitter at [\@mstk](https://twitter.com/mstk)! This post and all others are
published under the [CC-BY-NC-ND
3.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) license. Corrections
and edits via pull request are welcome and encouraged at [the source
repository](https://github.com/mstksg/inCode).

If you feel inclined, or this post was particularly helpful for you, why not
consider [supporting me on Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/justinle/overview),
or a [BTC donation](bitcoin:3D7rmAYgbDnp4gp4rf22THsGt74fNucPDU)? :)

[^1]: These short posts won't be counted as "paid" Patreon posts.

[^2]: I can't take credit for this idea myself; I heard about it from
    [mniip](http://mniip.com/), who mentioned it during a discussion on freenode
    ##adventofcode.

[^3]: Note that the current version of *free-algebras* on haddocks actually has
    a performance bug that makes appends $O(n^2)$. I've made a [pull
    request](https://github.com/coot/free-algebras/pull/4) fixing this, to give
    us reasonable times for this challenge!

