Giant Photons
=============

> Originally posted by [Justin Le](https://blog.jle.im/).
> [Read online!](https://blog.jle.im/entry/giant-photon.html)

I was asked a question the other day where someone asked what the arrangement of
photons in a laser beam was as it traveled from the laser. Were they equally
spaced, crystalline, or random?

The question didn't seem to make sense to me at first, so I asked for further
clarification. It turns out that the asker viewed a laser beam as consisting of
a bunch of identical ball-like photons all traveling side-by-side, marching in
parallel lines towards their eventual goal. In their mind, a laser beam was like
a water stream, where the photons were individual water molecules. After all, a
laser beam has width, and a photon is a "point particle", right? So it must be a
bunch of photons traveling side-by-side.

This makes sense in the context of pop science. We talk about a beam of light as
consisting of photons, where its color is the frequency of its constituent
photons and its *amplitude*/brightness as corresponding roughly to the "number
of photons" emitted. If we do the math, then the average commercial hand-held
laser, operating at a power of around 1 mW and emitting 700nm red light, would
appear to have a cross-sectional flux of roughly $3.5 \times 10^{15}$ (three and
a half quadrillion) photons per second. So, in this picture, a handheld laser
would be like a hose spraying a quadrillion little balls out of its end per
second at the speed of light.

In this light, the asker's question begins to make sense. If this laser is
traveling in a straight line, then all of these quadrillion balls must also be
traveling perfectly straight side-by-side. So, are these balls all traveling in
a neat arrangement with some geometry, or is it random? The asker even proposed
a way to test this: place a detector screen in the path of the laser, and detect
the points where each laser hits the screen. And you, the reader...does this
interpretation make sense to you? Can you predict the answer to this person's
question?

Answering this question required getting to the heart of popular
misunderstandings of the "wave-particle duality", and what a photon even *is*.

## What is a Photon?

In this light, what *is* a laser, if not a stream of photon balls? Well, like
all Quantum Mechanics problems, we can approach this in terms of a wave
function. In the case of the photon and of light, this wave function is an
excitation of electromagnetic field.

In particular, for a laser, this looks like a very powerful and coherent wave
front in the electromagnetic field. You might be aware of the fact that light is
"just" waves in the electromagnetic field. Typically we see light as the
combination ("superposition") of many different waves of different frequency and
phase...and it's very rare that we get a wavefront of light that is just one
large coherent wave with a single frequency and single phase. Think of it as the
difference between a single large ocean wave (tsumani) vs.Â many different ocean
waves of different widths all coming at once (like in a rough storm).

If we look at a laser beam as a wavefront..."where" is the photon here?

Consider that this wavefront has frequency and phase (the ups and downs in the
wave are all moving "together"), but it also has *amplitude* (roughly
corresponding to energy or intensity or brightness).

Now comes the quantum part. Light waves, being quantum concepts, can only ever
take on *quantized* amplitudes, or quantized energies. This means that its
amplitude and energy are "pixelated", in a sense: they can only take on discrete
values.

In the case of energy, this discretization means that the energy of the laser
beam exists on a "staircase" of possible values, where each step is an increase
of $\Delta E = \frac{h c}{\lambda}$, where $h$ is the Planck constant and $c$ is
the seed of light in a vacuum. So for a 700nm red laser, this step size is about
1.77 electron-Volts of energy. You can have a 8.85eV red laser and a 10.62eV
laser (five steps, or six steps)...but you can't have anything in-between (no
9.5eV 700nm lasers!)

This means that if this laser beam ever *loses* or *gains* energy, it can't lose
any small amount of energy. Its energy can only ever be integer multiples of
1.77eV...so it can only ever gain or lose energy in increments of 1.77eV!

This "minimal increment" of energy --- this abstract concept of a minimal
$\Delta E$ --- is known as a *photon*.

*That* is a photon. Not a little point-particle ball you shoot out of a canon,
but rather an abstract *name* we give to the minimal amount a wave energy in the
electromagnetic field is allowed to change. The *concept* of that minimal
$\Delta E$ is what we call a photon.

## A Quadrillion Giant Photons

Now, the EM field is neat because it allows for *superposition* --- two waves
can exist independently "on top" of each other, and their contributions to the
EM field will add together linearly. So, in this sense, we can think of a
10.62eV laser beam as *six identical 1.77eV beams* all existing "on top of each
other".

In the same sense, we can think of a commercial 1mW 700nm laser as consisting of
about 3.5 quadrillion *identical* 1.77ev beams, all stacked *on top* of each
other. Each of these beams have identical frequency, phase, position ... but
also they also all have the same full width of the laser beam.

Note, this isn't necessarily what is "actually" there-- rather, it's a possible
interpretation of a 1mW wave. We can conceptually imagine a coherent 1mW wave as
over a quadrillion *identical* 1.77ev waves super-imposed on top of each other.

So, a laser beam doesn't consist of three and a half quadrillion little balls
all flying out side-by-side: a 1mW laser beam can be thought of as being a sum
(superposition) of 3.5 quadrillion *identical* weaker (1.77eV) equally wide
laser beams, all *overlapping each other*. And each of these *hypothetical*
weaker beams is known as a photon.

A typical commercial laser beam has a diameter around the order of a few
millimeters. And because we can think of it as the sum of over a quadrillion
individual photons, it means that each of those photons, individually, is also a
few millimeters wide!

The photons we're looking at aren't a bunch of tiny balls flying out --- they're
a bunch of identical big thicc bois flying out perfectly overlapping each other.
A quadrillion *giant* photons.

## Back to the Discrete

These photons are all super-imposed perfectly, and perfectly identical. But is
there any way we can count single photons?

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hi, thanks for reading! You can reach me via email at <justin@jle.im>, or at
twitter at [\@mstk](https://twitter.com/mstk)! This post and all others are
published under the [CC-BY-NC-ND
3.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/) license. Corrections
and edits via pull request are welcome and encouraged at [the source
repository](https://github.com/mstksg/inCode).

If you feel inclined, or this post was particularly helpful for you, why not
consider [supporting me on Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/justinle/overview),
or a [BTC donation](bitcoin:3D7rmAYgbDnp4gp4rf22THsGt74fNucPDU)? :)

