In Memory of Ertugrul Söylemez (1985 - 2018)
============================================

> Originally posted by [Justin Le](https://blog.jle.im/) on May 22, 2018.
> [Read online!](https://blog.jle.im/entry/in-memory-of-ertugrul-soylemez.html)

I was heartbroken to [find out
recently](https://byorgey.wordpress.com/2018/05/21/ertugrul-soylemez-1985-2018/)
that [Ertugrul Söylemez](http://ertes.eu/about.html) has passed away suddenly.
Many have come forward to express their sadness about this passing and how much
this has impacted the Haskell community, and how much of a loss it is for
functional programming at large.

They aren't wrong; Ertugrul was one of the faces of the friendly, warm,
encouraging, patient Haskell teaching that Haskell has grown to be known for.
Ertugrul was also one of the original pioneers in the implementation and theory
of Functional Reactive Programming and continued to innovate even through this
year. His name is now and forever will be synonymous with the "pull-based"
variant of functional reactive programming. And the freenode #haskell channel
and the Haskell community at large will have one less friendly face who always
enjoys helping new people learn.

However, I wanted to just put some words down about his personal influence in my
Haskell, Academic, and FOSS career.

When I was a new Haskeller, a lot of things confused me. But the passion of
people like Ertugrul to help me understand concepts that I found interesting
late into the night was one of the things that really made it worth it.

One of these lead to the creation of my first ever Haskell library,
*[auto](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/auto)*. *auto* is basically
literally a direct translation of one of our conversations (and somewhat of a
derivative of his own library
*[netwire](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/netwire)*), and throughout the
entire implementation process he was open to the many questions I had. And some
of the features of the library (including implicit serialization) were directly
his innovations put into practice.

In a slightly different context --- as a new PhD student, I was told to follow
wherever my curiosity lead me. One of those lines lead me to "comonadic" image
processing, which was directly inspired by [this unfinished
article](https://hub.darcs.net/ertes/articles/browse/media-processing.lhs) of
his.

Thanks to this (and along with more help from him) I gave my first graduate
research presentation. And, following from this, I submitted my work to a CFP
for a conference and was [accepted to give my first ever conference
talk](http://talks.jle.im/lambdaconf-2016/).

I've come along way since those times. I now have fifteen packages published on
Hackage, and a few more in the pipeline. I've given [many more research
talks](http://talks.jle.im/) all over the world, as far as Ukraine. I'm no
longer a fresh PhD student new to research; I'm a PhD candidate getting ready to
defend my dissertation in the upcoming months. I'm still learning Haskell, but
inspired by an example of a helpful Haskell attitude, I maintain a Haskell blog
year after year that I hope people have, too, found helpful.

But I know I'll always remember my roots --- and the person who inspired and
helped me with my first Haskell questions, my first library, and my first
graduate research presentations. I can say with confidence that there is no
single person who has personally influenced my Haskell career more. Ertugrul was
the mentor I was blessed to have, and I know anyone who has worked with him or
talked to him feels the same way.

Haskell and Functional programming lost a great innovator and educator, but I
know a lot of people will say that they, like me, have lost a great friend and
mentor.

Thank you.

